TOFU-382  the account picker has no arm that turns it off
bench/picker, 2026-09-22


ANSWER

The corpus cannot separate the three arms. There are zero recorded window readings in
.tofu, over zero distinct accounts, so first usable, round robin and headroom make the
same choice at every decision point there is, which is none. No number is offered in
place of the answer.

The reason is structural rather than accidental. Nothing in the tree ever writes a
window reading to disk. quota.Poller holds a report in a map in memory, the status verb
prints one and drops it, and no session header, ledger row or state file carries one.
A corpus for this bench cannot accumulate until something records a reading.


CONDITIONS

Corpus        .tofu/log and .tofu/sessions, read only. 404 files, 18,401 rows scanned
Readings      0 recorded window readings, 0 distinct accounts, 0 skipped for a missing
              field. A row is a candidate reading when it carries a windows array
Ledger        2,999 decision rows at .tofu/log, unchanged, nothing here wrote to it
Machine       Windows 10 Pro 19045
Measured      2026-09-22
Live calls    none. No model call, no network, no credential read, no vendor polled
Warm up       none. Nothing was discarded


THE INSTRUMENT'S OWN OUTPUT, OVER THE RECORDED CORPUS

corpus: ../../.tofu/log, ../../.tofu/sessions, read at 2026-09-22 18:40 -03:00
404 files, 18401 rows, 0 recorded window readings over 0 distinct accounts, 0 skipped
0 decision points, one per provider and reading time

the cost of a forced move, from ../forkcache/testdata/forks.jsonl, child_first.cache_read
  turn-18d6f8d9e45f8efc-f2      9457 tokens of fresh prefix
  turn-18d724d865ed9264-f2      6105 tokens of fresh prefix

the three arms over the recorded readings
arm               moves    walls        at 9457        at 6105
first usable        n/a      n/a            n/a            n/a
round robin         n/a      n/a            n/a            n/a
headroom            n/a      n/a            n/a            n/a

the corpus cannot separate the three arms. 0 recorded window readings over 0 distinct
accounts, and an arm only differs from another when two accounts are usable at the same
decision point.
what it would take: a recorded window reading per account per poll, written where a
bench can read it. Nothing in the tree writes one today: the poller caches a report in
memory and no session, ledger or state row carries it.
no number is offered in place of the answer.


WHAT IT WOULD TAKE

One append-only file, a row per account per poll, carrying the provider, the credential
row number the status screen already shows, the fetch time, and each window's id, used
fraction and reset time. No token, no account id, no key: the row number is the only
identity it needs, and it is already printed on screen.

Two accounts on one provider must be usable at the same decision point for any arm to
differ from another. One account's windows, however many readings, gives all three arms
the same answer at every point.

At the recorded poll floor of five minutes, two accounts on claude-sub produce about 576
readings a day, and a week of ordinary use is enough to score the arms on real spend.


THE COST OF A FORCED MOVE, AND WHERE IT COMES FROM

9,457 and 6,105 tokens, the two anthropic rows of TOFU-373's pinned corpus at
bench/forkcache/testdata/forks.jsonl, field child_first.cache_read, reported in
bench/forkcache/report-2026-09-22.txt. The instrument reads those two rows rather than
carrying a transcribed literal, and a test fails if the file stops holding exactly two
anthropic rows or if either reports a non-positive prefix.

They are kept as two columns and never averaged. A mean of two observations is a guess
wearing a number's clothes, and the two differ by 55 percent.

A move mid-session costs one fresh prefix. A wall, an account running out with none left
to move to, is counted separately and is not priced, because what it costs is the end of
the session rather than a token count.


THE ARMS, AND WHY THESE THREE

first usable   the lowest credential row number that is not spent. What tofu did before
               0.4.9, and the deterministic baseline: no ranking at all
round robin    rotate to the next usable row number at every decision point, wrapping.
               The rival's rule, from
               .local/sources/oh-my-pi-main/packages/ai/src/auth-storage.ts:1834, the
               only harness of twelve that holds two credentials for one provider. It
               moves without a reason and never measures the move
headroom       quota.Pick at internal/llm/quota/pick.go, unmodified. The bench calls the
               shipped function rather than restating its rule

All three choose from the same usable set, so the comparison is the ranking and not the
filter. held resets when the provider changes, because an account held for claude-sub is
not a candidate for codex-sub and a provider boundary is not a move.


THE INSTRUMENT DOES WORK, SHOWN ON A FIXTURE

A hand built fixture, six decision points over two accounts, labelled as a fixture and
never mixed with the recorded corpus. It exists to prove the instrument can separate the
arms once readings exist, and it is not evidence about the picker.

corpus: a hand built fixture, not the recorded corpus, read at 2026-09-22 12:00 +00:00
0 files, 0 rows, 0 recorded window readings over 2 distinct accounts, 0 skipped
6 decision points, one per provider and reading time

the three arms over the recorded readings
arm               moves    walls        at 9457        at 6105
first usable          2        1          18914          12210
round robin           4        1          37828          24420
headroom              1        1           9457           6105

Round robin pays four moves where headroom pays one, on a fixture built to hold the two
accounts steady for three points. That is the shape the rival's rule has by construction
and the shape this bench was built to price. It is arithmetic over a fixture, so it
settles nothing about real sessions.


TESTS, AND THE RED RUN BEHIND THEM

Two assertions were inverted and run against the real code before they passed:

  --- FAIL: TestTheArmArithmeticOnASmallFixture (0.00s)
      picker_test.go:60: headroom: 1 moves and 1 walls, want 4 and 1
  --- FAIL: TestAWindowPastItsResetCountsAsFullAgain (0.00s)
      picker_test.go:71: a window 95 percent used whose reset has passed has headroom 1,
      want 0.05

The reset rule is the one most likely to be wrong, so it is asserted three ways: a
window 95 percent used whose reset has passed reports headroom 1, the headroom arm
picks that account over one with 60 percent left, and the same pair with the reset in
the future picks the other way.

The skip counting was proved by deleting the account guard from readingOf and running
the fixture again:

  --- FAIL: TestAReadingMissingAFieldIsSkippedAndNamed (0.01s)
  panic: runtime error: invalid memory address or nil pointer dereference
  tofu/bench/picker.readingOf reading.go:125

The guard was restored and the test passes, naming provider, account, at and
used_fraction in order over a six row fixture.


COMMANDS RUN

  gofmt -l bench/picker                              printed nothing
  go vet ./bench/picker/...                          exit 0
  go tool golangci-lint run ./bench/picker/...       0 issues
  go test ./bench/picker/... -count=1 -timeout 180s  ok, 7 tests, 0 skips

No tree-wide check was run. Every command is scoped to ./bench/picker/... .


WHAT THE BENCH NEEDS AND CANNOT WRITE

One thing, and it is the whole answer above:

  internal/llm/quota, a recorded window reading. The Poller caches a Report per
  provider and account id in memory and nothing persists it. A line appended per poll,
  carrying provider, credential row number, fetch time and the windows, is enough for
  this bench to score the three arms on real spend. The credential row number is the
  identity, never the account id and never a token.

  Until that exists the picker's own acceptance cannot be met by measurement, and
  headroom stands on its argument rather than on a number.
